Be a part of Classilla.

*Please don't modify this document unless you are authorized to do so.*

==Classilla needs your help===

If you are a classic Mac owner, you know by now that you won't get any support from Apple, and very little support from the software developer community, who both think everyone is running OS X. Heck, PowerPC Macs in general have pretty much been dustbinned. So if you want to be still using your indefatigable little classic Mac in the 21st century, it's going to need some help on your part. If you want something done ... well, you know the old saying.

To make Classilla a better browser for you, give back to the community and lend a hand. You don't even need to know how to program. Even if you have merely an understanding of web authoring and a shared lib to you is a bookstore with two people in it, you can help. And if you know something about C/C++ (and better still something about Mozilla or classic Mac programming), we'd _really_ like to talk to you.

In broad strokes, we need:

===Distillers===

If you understand HTML (and particularly CSS) -- and !JavaScript is a plus -- we have a use for you, even if you don't do that !CodeWarrior thing.

A *distiller* reviews bad sites, finds the problematic portions that Classilla isn't rendering or executing correctly, distills the individual problems into test cases (hence the name distiller), and hands the distilled bugs off to a coder to find a solution.

An *exceptional distiller* does all that, but then can also find where the problem was in Mozilla Bugzilla and give the coder a Bugzilla number to review. If the coder can adapt the patch, the job is done. And that means an awful lot to efficient bug squashing.

There are so many sites that still don't work, and so many Bugzilla bugs to review, that odds are very good that an extant buggy site already has a fix -- we just have to match the bug with the fix. You don't have to understand what the code is doing, necessarily, nor do you have to know how to fix it. All you have to do is diagnose the problem and the coders will attack it. 

Do you think you could help? Send a message to classilla at floodgap dawt com.

===Coders===

If you can program C/C++, particularly the Metrowerks idiosyncracies, we really have a use for you and that use is obvious.

No, you don't have to know the first thing about the Mac toolbox, and if a clod like Cameron can learn the guts of Mozilla, then so can you. The great thing about Clecko is that Mozilla wrote Gecko using cross-platform code instead of idiosyncratic Mac code, so if you understand C (and better still if you've written Firefox extensions or other things leveraging XPCOM), you can contribute.

A good coder should be able to look at a patch and figure out how to backport it to Clecko. Cameron is posting some hints on how to ReCOMtaminate layout equivalencies -- the code is already in Clecko, it's just expressed differently.

An exceptional coder can do his or her own hacks. We're not quite to that stage yet, but we're only clods. Maybe you're better.

Do you think you could help? Send a message to classilla at floodgap dawt com.