#summary Frequently asked user questions.

= FAQ =

This page will be for frequent user questions. Some of these are also answered on the main site, but are also here for convenient reference.


==What is Classilla?==
Classilla is an updated open-source Mozilla-based web browser for the classic Macintosh OS (not Mac OS X, although it will likely run under Classic through 10.4). It is targeted for Mac OS 9, but will include 8.6 compatibility where possible.

==What is Clecko?==
Clecko is the fork of Gecko, the Mozilla layout engine, used in Classilla. Mozilla ended official Mac OS 9 support with 1.2, although versions through 1.3.1 would still generally build with patches for OS X (the old Fizzilla build) removed. 

Because Mozilla 1.4 and up include so much OS X specific code that does not work with the !CarbonLib available for Mac OS 9, the decision was made to split Gecko off at 1.3.1 (using the Gecko that was maintained in the venerable old WaMCoM build) and backport later changes to it rather than use the Mozilla code base directly, which wouldn't build. This version of Gecko thus has a significantly different lineage despite having a common ancestor. To avoid confusion with the main Gecko, even though this forked Gecko is still almost all official Mozilla code, Classilla's version of Gecko was renamed Clecko.

==What was WaMCoM?==
WaMCoM was Kai Engert's maintained version of Mozilla 1.3.1 and the direct ancestor of Classilla. It is no longer supported or developed.

==Does Mozilla support Classilla or Clecko?==
No, and it is highly unlikely they ever will again given the niche user base. For this reason, *you should not ask Mozilla for support of Classilla/Clecko, nor should you ever file Bugzilla entries.* If there is a specific issue that merits Bugzilla notation, let the Classilla project leads determine that on your behalf.

==When will new versions of Classilla come out?==
See [Roadmap].

==What is Bugzilla? What are Bugzilla numbers?==
Strictly speaking [http://bugzilla.mozilla.org/ Bugzilla] refers to either the Bugzilla software package, or Mozilla's own Bugzilla installation which is used for tracking Mozilla bugs. In our usage, we almost always mean the latter sense. A Bugzilla number refers to the ID number of a specific issue in the Bugzilla database, with its associated patch(es), if any. *If your bug report corresponds to a specific Bugzilla number, including that in your report helps immensely as there may already be a patch that can be adapted.*

Again, you should *not* file Bugzilla issues for Classilla. You should only ever file Classilla issues on this site. *To file a bug, go to the Issues tab.*

==Will Classilla ever be as up-to-date as Firefox?==
That depends on the devotion and hardwork of the maintainers, leads and programmers. We're always looking for a few good Mac nerds.

==How do I build my own Classilla? How can I contribute code?==
To build your own Classilla on your own system, you need to set up a sane build environment. See HowToBuild.

Once you have Classilla built and want to do your own stuff to send in, you have to obey certain conventions for code (and to ensure that resource forks are not trampled upon). See HowToSubmit.

==My question is not answered by this document.==
If you have a specific issue with Classilla which you think is a bug, look under the Issues tab and file it if you don't see it already.

If you have questions about Classilla or how it is administered, see http://www.classilla.org/ for how you can E-mail the project leads.